Facing Alexa, the powerful lower their guard: anthropomorphization of
smart personal assistants decreases privacy concerns for people with
high sense of power
Ertugrul Uysal
University of Neuchâtel
Valéry Bezençon
University of Neuchâtel
Sascha Alavi
University of Bochum

Cite as:
Uysal Ertugrul, Bezençon Valéry, Alavi Sascha (2020), Facing Alexa, the powerful
lower their guard: anthropomorphization of smart personal assistants decreases privacy
concerns for people with high sense of power. Proceedings of the European Marketing
Academy, 49th, (64283)

1

Facing Alexa, the powerful lower their guard: anthropomorphization of
smart personal assistants decreases privacy concerns for people with high
sense of power

Abstract

With rapidly increasing popularity, Smart Personal Assistants (SPA) are becoming prominent
characters in our daily lives. Their ubiquity raises concern for data privacy as SPAs may be
listening to our most intimate conversations at home. Due to their salient human-like features
(e.g., human voice, name) we are inclined to anthropomorphize them. We investigated the
influence of anthropomorphization of SPAs on consumer’s privacy concerns and the
moderating role of sense of power in this relationship. People with high (low) power
exhibited lower (higher) levels of privacy concerns when the perceived anthropomorphization
was higher. We suggest that high power increases the perceived control and this illusion of
control decreases privacy concerns. We extend this result by showing that lower privacy
concerns lead to a greater frequency of use. Finally, we discuss the importance of
understanding power in relation to increasingly human-like technologies and ramifications for
consumer protection.

Keywords: Smart Personal Assistants, Anthropomorphization, Sense of Power

Target Track: Social Responsibility & Ethics

2
1. Introduction

Smart personal assistant (SPA) users have surpassed 100 million in the US alone,
which is almost one third of the population of the country. In January 2019, Amazon
announced that they have sold 100 million Alexa devices. With such strong penetration rate,
smart personal assistants are becoming a prominent character of our daily lives. They run our
errands, facilitate our entertainment and recommend us what to buy. Relying on artificial
intelligence and natural language processing, they are the latest artifact of digital age that
aims to enhance comfort and convenience.
Voice-controlled technologies have been around for some time, but the latest
generation of these devices have increasingly human-like features and occupy our most
private spaces. Their ability to speak back to us gives them a special status and leads us to
attribute human-like features to them (Purington, Taft, Sannon, Bazarova and Taylor, 2017).
We have ingrained over-learned rules about how to interact with other people as social
beings. Attributing human-like features to non-human entities changes the way we behave
towards them (Epley, Waytz and Cacioppo, 2007). It has been reported that 500,000 people
have said ‘I love you’ to Amazon’s Alexa and some even perceive Alexa as a companion
(Turk, 2016). Anthropomorphized agents are seen as more social beings and people are more
likely to cooperate with them (Waytz, Cacioppo and Epley, 2010; Goetz & Kiesler, 2002). On
the other hand, anthropomorphization might also lead to greater feelings of discomfort,
eeriness and a threat to human identity (Mende, Scott, van Doorn, Grewal and Shanks, 2019).
Also, people’s risk perceptions are influenced by anthropomorphization (Kim & McGill,
2011). An important distinction of our study from previous work is examining the SPAs, an
entity with highly anthropomorphized features yet lacking an established ontological position.
In analyzing the human-SPA relationships, we draw insights from human
relationships. We identify sense of power as an important factor that shapes our behavior and
social interactions. Literature suggests that when we interact with an anthropomorphized
entity, we bring with us our preconceptions and our “default settings” of social interaction
with humans. We may not thank a vending machine, but “Thank you, Siri” is apparently a
common phrase heard by the SPAs (for a discussion of politeness towards SPAs, see Burton
& Gaskin, 2019). This suggests that sense of power which is an important concept in human
relationships may potentially extend and influence human to human-like technology
relationships.

3
Just like any new technology, there are barriers to accepting the SPAs in our lives.
Perhaps the most relevant of these barriers, given the digital age we are living in, is the
privacy concerns. Müller-Seitz, Dautzenberg, Creusen and Stromereder (2009) proposed a
revised acceptance model of technology and highlighted security concerns related to the
privacy of user data as an important factor in the acceptance and subsequent use of a new
technology. With many digital industry giants facing severe criticism over proper use of
consumers’ data, an ‘assistant’ residing in your living room, listening to you all day will
surely need to tackle the concerns of privacy to be able to hold its place.
In this research, we examine the influence of anthropomorphization of SPAs on
people’s privacy concerns and subsequent usage frequency as well as the essential moderating
role of sense of power in this relationship. We recruited SPA users on an online survey
platform and asked them about their habits of use and perceptions of their assistant. Our
results showed that sense of power has a negative moderating effect on the relationship
between anthropomorphization and privacy concerns. We also show that lower privacy
concerns lead to a greater frequency of use. Considering the contextual malleability of power
perceptions (Galinsky, Gruenfeld and Magee, 2003), our research highlights the importance
of understanding social power in relation to increasingly human-like technologies. The
pervasive and almost unescapable use of online technology has sparked increasing concerns
related to data privacy (e.g., Banerjee, 2019), vulnerable (i.e., powerless) groups of consumers
(e.g., Nunan & Di Domenico, 2019) and digital addiction (e.g., Berthon, Pitt and Campbell,
2019). We believe that our results contribute to a better understanding of the effect of
anthropomorphized technologies on consumers and generate interesting implications for the
protection of the well-being of the consumer. We contribute to sense of power literature by
showing that the role of power in human relationships extends to relations with human-like
technologies. This study adds to the previous findings on the interplay between
anthropomorphization and sense of power influencing behavior, including our sensitivity to
risk (Kim et al., 2011). Finally, we highlight the importance of mitigating privacy concerns in
user acceptance of new technologies.

2. Theoretical development

In this section, we build our hypotheses with inspirations from psychology,
personality and consumer research literatures on anthropomorphization and its behavioral
outcomes (e.g., Epley et al., 2008; Kim et al., 2011; Mende et al., 2019).

4

Figure 1. Overview of the conceptual framework and the results of the model estimation.

2.1 Anthropomorphization. Anthropomorphization has been defined as attributing
human-like features and mental states to non-human entities (Epley et al., 2007; Waytz et al.,
2010). We do this almost automatically; as children we speak to our toys endlessly, give them
distinct personalities and imagine how they are feeling. Even simple lines resembling a face
seem to elicit anthropomorphizing responses (Kim & McGill, 2011). Anthropomorphizing
non-human agents has been reported to have positive effects. People were more likely to
cooperate with robots that are more human-like (Goetz & Kiesler, 2002), and greater
perceived human-likeness of Amazon’s Alexa was associated with greater satisfaction
(Purington et al., 2017). An alternative stream of research suggests, however, that human-like
features could also lead to aversive responses. The concept of uncanny valley (Mori,
MacDorman and Kageki, 2012) proposes that an entity that exhibits human-like features but
fails to completely meet the requirements of being a human may elicit feelings of discomfort.
A recent work on humanoid service robots provides evidence for this concept by showing that
consumer reported greater feelings of discomfort and more compensatory responses when
interacting with humanoid service robots (Mende et al., 2019). When the anthropomorphizing
cues were reduced (e.g. not giving it a human name, emphasizing that it’s a robot), though,
the compensatory responses were mitigated.
In our social interactions, we carry certain social expectations and adhere to generally
accepted social rules. Literature suggests that we apply social expectations to the interaction
when we anthropomorphize the entities (Kim & McGill, 2011). With a nonanthropomorphized entity, our expectations of a social interaction and sensitivity to risk are
clearer; so we form accurate expectations according to the machine’s settings and non-social
disposition. However, with an anthropomorphized entity, we could perceive a mismatch

5
between the anticipated human qualities and the perceived imperfect qualities. For example,
the human voice of a SPA would signal its human likeness, but when you get a generic,
scripted answer such as “I’m not sure I understand” several times in a row, you see that the
anticipated human quality is imperfect. This mismatch might be realized more saliently
especially when the ontological position of the entity is not well established, as in the case of
SPAs. Since consumers are all different in their perceptions and expectations in social
interactions, it is important to understand how different perceptions lead to different consumer
behaviors. Kim et al. (2011) provides evidence for this stream of thought by showing that risk
perceptions are influenced by anthropomorphization. We next introduce sense of power and
its potential role on our relationships with anthropomorphized objects.

2.2 The Role of Sense of Power. Power is a fundamental concept in social sciences that
shapes our social interactions. A large body of literature suggests that power has a pervasive
presence, ubiquitous in most aspects of our lives (Keltner, Gruenfeld, and Anderson, 2003;
Anderson, John and Keltner, 2012). Power has been defined as the control over valued
resources (Fiske, 1993), ability to influence others (Weber, 2009) and ability to do what you
want without being influenced by others (French, Raven and Cartwright, 1959; Emerson,
1962). As broad as it is in its definitions, we focus on the social aspect of power; the ability to
influence, have control over others, as delineated by Lammers, Stoker and Stapel (2009). In
our daily lives, all our relationships function in relation to certain power dynamics (Keltner et
al., 2003). Moreover, literature provides evidence that the customs of our social interactions
transfer to our interactions with anthropomorphized entities. (Kim et al., 2011) Therefore, we
are interested in investigating our relationship with the highly anthropomorphized SPAs in
relation to our sense of power.
Kim et al. (2011) has shown that an individual’s sense of power moderates the effect
of anthropomorphization on risk perception. Specifically, they show that people with low
(high) power perceived a higher (lower) risk when the risk-bearing entity was highly
anthropomorphized. They propose that those with high power perceived greater control over
the anthropomorphized entity. Previous literature provides support for this explanation;
people believe they have more control when they have more power over others (Fast,
Gruenfeld, Sivanathan and Galinsky, 2009). As their stimuli, Kim et al. (2011) used a casino
slot machine with or without physical features that resemble a face (Experiment 1). In the
second experiment, they anthropomorphized a disease, phrasing the details of the disease in
the way of an anthropomorphized story (Experiment 2). Given that we are readily inclined to

6
attribute human-like features to non-human agents, we believe that the anthropomorphic
nature of the SPA are far from subtle. Even though the SPAs do not have a physical presence
(yet!), they possess highly anthropomorphic features such as a human voice and (in some
cases) a human name. Although SPAs may not appear as overtly risky as a slot machine or a
disease, consumers may consider the underlying risks of using SPAs related to data privacy.
Security concerns related to the privacy of the user data has been shown as a crucial
part of accepting a new technology (Müller-Seitz et al., 2009). In their study, Müller-Seitz et
al. investigated the acceptance of then new Radio Frequency Identification (RFID) technology
and they propose that the overall attitude of consumers toward novel technologies and the
intention to use this new technology is strongly tied to the privacy concerns about the use of
their personal data. Concerns over consent and the protection of private data directly translate
to SPAs. We use SPAs for highly personal tasks, locate them at the center of our living space
and connect them with every other ‘smart’ part of our lives. This means data for almost every
aspect of our lives, collected and analyzed for making the algorithm, and subsequently our
experience, better. Confiding in an entity with such rich personal data would certainly not be
without concerns.
We hypothesize:
H1:

Sense of power negatively moderates the effect of anthropomorphization on privacy
concerns. Specifically, the effect of anthropomorphization on privacy concerns is
more negative (i.e., less concerns) when the sense of power is high.

H2:

Privacy concerns has a negative direct effect on the frequency of use of the SPAs.
Specifically, when the privacy concerns are low, the frequency of use increases.

3. Methodology

3.1 Measurements
The measurements included scales from prior research, with appropriate adjustments
to the context. The 8-item Anthropomorphization scale was adopted from Epley, Akalis,
Waytz and Cacioppo (2008). The 8-item Sense of Power scale was adopted from Anderson &
Galinsky (2006). Privacy concerns were measured with 4 items asking about concerns related
to personal data. Frequency of use was measured using 5 items. The frequency of use
question was broken down into five categories to ensure that users think exhaustively of their
use of the SPA (Entertainment, Personal Organization, Seeking Information, Device
Management, Purchase-related).

7
Subsequently, a questionnaire was created on online survey software Qualtrics and all
the items were pre-tested to ensure the understandability of the questions. Survey participants
responded to seven-point Likert scales anchored at “strongly disagree” (1) and “strongly
agree” (7) for Sense of Power and Privacy Concerns measures; “not at all” (1) and “very
much” (7) for the Anthropomorphization measure. The frequency of use measures provided 8
choices from ‘Never’ (1) and Less than once a day (2) to More than 5 times a day (8).
We argue that using survey data provided us with high external validity, as we
included only real SPA owners in this data set. This ensured familiarity of the products and a
more realistic context to investigate the phenomenon. In a fictive scenario or a lab
experiment, capturing the privacy concerns might have been less reliable. Instead of
imagining a privacy rating, our participants are active users of SPAs and their data provides
us with a first-hand, directly experienced information on privacy concerns. We believe that
this approach is able to provide results with high validity.

3.2 Data Collection and Sample
400 participants were recruited from online survey platform Prolific. Currently
owning a home assistant (e.g. Amazon Echo, Google Assistant) was used as pre-screening
criterion. This pre-screening was provided by the platform by default. Four participants were
excluded from the analysis due to facing technical problems during the survey resulting in
incomplete recording of data. The final sample contained 396 usable responses. Participants
included 62.1% women with overall sample age ranging from 18 to 78 (mean age: 35.6).

3.3 Results
To test our conceptual model we used structural equation path modeling by using a maximum
likelihood estimator. We specified the model as depicted in Figure 1. Results of our model
show that there is a negative moderating influence of sense of power on the effect of
anthropomorphization on privacy concerns (H1: 1 = -.138, p <.05). This confirms our
hypothesis, showing that people with high (low) sense of power have decreased (increased)
privacy concerns when the degree of anthropomorphization is high. This effect is shown in
the interaction plot in Figure 2. Moreover, our results confirm that greater privacy concerns
decrease the frequency of use (H2: 2 = -.397, p <.05). However, Anthropomorphization and
Sense of Power did not have direct effect on privacy concerns. Control variables Age, Income
and Level of Education also did not have any influence on the privacy concerns. Gender had a
significant effect on privacy concerns, with being female predicting higher privacy concerns

8
(3 = -.389, p <.01). Gender also had a significant effect on Frequency of Use, with males
using the SPA more overall (4 = 1.913, p <.01). Results of the model estimation are shown in
the conceptual framework on Figure 1 (Model Fit Information: CFI: .862; TLI: .654;
RMSEA= .045).

Figure 2. The interaction plot for the moderating effect of sense of power on the relationship
between anthropomorphization and privacy concerns.

4. Discussion

Previous work has shown the influence of anthropomorphization on consumer
behavior. Our first contribution is to investigate this established phenomenon in the context of
risks associated with Smart Personal Assistants. Nowadays with an intimate place in our
homes, it is important to understand this highly anthropomorphized technology. In the digital
age we’re living in, consumers are increasingly worried about the protection of their personal
data. It’s all very new; most consumers don’t even have a clue about how to be protected
against the negative consequences of online technologies. Major platforms are heavily
criticized for not taking the issue of privacy protection seriously and governments are starting
to come up with regulations on protecting the privacy of the consumer. We suggest that Smart
Personal Assistants may indeed have a special status, often perceived to be more than an
algorithm. We believe that consumer relationship with SPAs is a fruitful avenue for future
research.
Second, drawing from the literature on the important role of power in human
interactions, we bring sense of power into the discussion to probe into consumers’ perception
of the SPAs (Keltner, Gruenfeld, and Anderson, 2003; Anderson, John and Keltner, 2012).

9
We suggest that, just as influential as it is in human interactions, sense of power may indeed
play a crucial role in shaping consumer perceptions and interactions of the SPAs. We provide
evidence for the moderating role of power on the relationship between anthropomorphization
and privacy concerns. In line with previous work, we suggest that high power increases the
perceived control over the entity and this illusion of control decreases the privacy concerns
(Kim et al., 2011). Understanding the role of sense of power in relation to SPAs might have
important practical implications for marketers because power perceptions are highly
susceptible to influence. Therefore, the fact consumers might be easily manipulated in line
with the strategies of marketers is a worrying implication.
Finally, our results give insights into privacy concerns related to emerging
technologies that are far from being completely understood. A better understanding of
consumers’ relationship with the anthropomorphized technologies will also generate
important implications for the protection of the well-being of the customer.

5. References
Anderson, C., & Galinsky, A. D. (2006). Power, optimism, and risk‐taking. European journal
of social psychology, 36(4), 511-536.
Anderson, C., John, O. P., & Keltner, D. (2012). The personal sense of power. Journal of
personality, 80(2), 313-344.
Banerjee, S. (2019). Geosurveillance, Location Privacy, and Personalization. Journal of
Public Policy & Marketing, 38(4), 484-499.
Berthon, P., Pitt, L., & Campbell, C. (2019). Addictive De-Vices: A Public Policy Analysis of
Sources and Solutions to Digital Addiction. Journal of Public Policy & Marketing, 38(4),
451-468.
Burton, N. G., & Gaskin, J. (2019). “Thank You, Siri”: Politeness and Intelligent Digital
Assistants. AMCIS 2019 Proceedings.
Emerson, R. M. (1962). Power-dependence relations. American sociological review, 31-41.
Epley, N., Akalis, S., Waytz, A., & Cacioppo, J. T. (2008). Creating social connection
through inferential reproduction: Loneliness and perceived agency in gadgets, gods, and
greyhounds. Psychological science, 19(2), 114-120.
Epley, N., Waytz, A., & Cacioppo, J. T. (2007). On seeing human: a three-factor theory of
anthropomorphism. Psychological review, 114(4), 864.
Fast, N. J., Gruenfeld, D. H., Sivanathan, N., & Galinsky, A. D. (2009). Illusory control: A
generative force behind power's far-reaching effects. Psychological Science, 20(4), 502-508.

10
Fiske, S. T. (1993). Social cognition and social perception. Annual review of psychology,
44(1), 155-194.
French, J. R., Raven, B., & Cartwright, D. (1959). The bases of social power. Classics of
organization theory, 7, 311-320.
Galinsky, A. D., Gruenfeld, D. H., & Magee, J. C. (2003). From power to action. Journal of
personality and social psychology, 85(3), 453.
Goetz, J., & Kiesler, S. (2002). Cooperation with a robotic assistant. In CHI'02 Extended
Abstracts on Human Factors in Computing Systems (pp. 578-579). ACM.
Keltner, D., Gruenfeld, D. H., & Anderson, C. (2003). Power, approach, and inhibition.
Psychological review, 110(2), 265.
Kim, S., & McGill, A. L. (2011). Gaming with Mr. Slot or gaming the slot machine? Power,
anthropomorphism, and risk perception. Journal of Consumer Research, 38(1), 94-107.
Lammers, J., Stoker, J. I., & Stapel, D. A. (2009). Differentiating social and personal power:
Opposite effects on stereotyping, but parallel effects on behavioral approach tendencies.
Psychological Science, 20(12), 1543-1548.
Mende, M., Scott, M. L., van Doorn, J., Grewal, D., & Shanks, I. (2019). Service robots
rising: How humanoid robots influence service experiences and elicit compensatory consumer
responses. Journal of Marketing Research, 0022243718822827.
Mori, M., MacDorman, K. F., & Kageki, N. (2012). The uncanny valley [from the field].
IEEE Robotics & Automation Magazine, 19(2), 98-100.
Müller-Seitz, G., Dautzenberg, K., Creusen, U., & Stromereder, C. (2009). Customer
acceptance of RFID technology: Evidence from the German electronic retail sector. Journal
of retailing and consumer services, 16(1), 31-39.
Nunan, D., & Di Domenico, M. (2019). Older Consumers, Digital Marketing and Public
Policy A Review and Research Agenda. Journal of Public Policy and Marketing.
Purington, A., Taft, J. G., Sannon, S., Bazarova, N. N., & Taylor, S. H. (2017). Alexa is my
new BFF: social roles, user satisfaction, and personification of the amazon echo. In
Proceedings of the 2017 CHI Conference Extended Abstracts on Human Factors in
Computing Systems (pp. 2853-2859). ACM.
Turk, V. (2016). Home invasion. New Sci, 232, 16-17.
Waytz, A., Cacioppo, J., & Epley, N. (2010). Who sees human? The stability and importance
of individual differences in anthropomorphism. Perspectives on Psychological Science, 5(3),
219-232.
Weber, M. (2009). The theory of social and economic organization. Simon and Schuster.

