Meaning in context -- 0

Meaning in Context:
Metacognitive Experiences

Norbert Schwarz
University of Michigan

Sep 2008

The reference for this paper is:
Schwarz, N. (2010). Meaning in context: Metacognitive experiences. In B. Mesquita, L. F. Barrett, & E. R.
Smith (eds.), The mind in context (pp. 105 -125). New York: Guilford

Address correspondence to Norbert Schwarz, Institute for Social Research, University of Michigan, Ann
Arbor, MI 41806-1248; nschwarz@umich.edu

Meaning in context -- 1
As psychologists have long been aware, human cognition is highly context sensitive. How we
perceive simple objects, comprehend texts and utterances, form evaluative judgments, make sense of
othe s’ eha io and perform a myriad of other tasks is profoundly influenced by the immediate context
in which the respective task is situated. To account for such influences, researchers commonly assume
that the context influences the accessibility of applicable knowledge, which is brought to bear on the
task at hand (for reviews see Förster & Liberman, 2007; Higgins, 1996). Under most natural conditions,
this context sensitivity is adaptive by privileging information that is relevant in the cur rent situation at
the expense of other information that may be less germane, given current circumstances (for
discussions see Schwarz, 2007; Smith & Collins, this volume). However, the common focus on knowledge
accessibility misses that there is more to thinking than what comes to mind.
Thinking is accompanied by a host of subjective experiences, from metacognitive feelings of
ease or difficulty to affective reactions and bodily sensations. As Higgins (1998) noted, people commonly
assume that any thoughts that come to mind and any feelings they experience while thinking about
something bear on what they are thinking about – or why else would they have these thoughts and
feelings now, at this moment? Hence, people draw on their feelings as a source of information, unless
they become aware that their feelings may be due to an irrelevant source, thus undermining the
feeli g’s perceived relevance to the task at hand (for a review see Schwarz & Clore, 2007). Accordingly,
e a

ot p edi t a pe so ’s judg e ts o de isio s

e el k o i g what came to mind without

taking the accompanying subjective experiences into account. Adding further complexity, the meaning
of subjective experiences is itself malleable and the same experience can convey different information in
different contexts.
The present chapter addresses a particular type of subjective experience, namely the
metacognitive feelings that a ise f o

o ito i g o e’s o

og iti e processes. Not surprisingly,

processing new information, retrieving information from memory and generating thoughts can be
experienced as easy or difficult. Because numerous different variables – from environmental conditions
and the i fo

atio ’s presentation format to the nature of the task a d the pe so ’s knowledge and

bodily state – can make processing easy or difficult, the specific meaning of the experience is ambiguous
and requires interpretation: Is this text diffi ult to

ake se se of e ause I’m distracted, because I know

little about the topic, because the print font is hard to read or because the argument is utter nonsense?
How people interpret their metacognitive experiences depends on which of many potentially relevant
variables they attend to and which of many potentially applicable naïve theories of mental processes
they bring to bear. In most cases, an applicable theory, entailing a specification of relevant variables, is

Meaning in context -- 2
brought to mind by the task they face; if not, it may be constructed on the spot to make sense of the
experience in the given context. As in other domains of judgment, people are likely to rely on the most
accessible theory without considering plausible alternatives, unless the first interpretation tried fails to
yield a plausible result. This limited exploration of plausible alternatives is consistent with the
assu ptio that ou feeli gs a e a out

hate e is i the fo us of atte tio . As a result, the meaning

of metacognitive experiences is itself highly malleable and context sensitive.
As this discussion indicates, the role of contextual influences in judgment is more complex than
the common focus on knowledge accessibility suggests. At the first level, contextual variables like
previous exposure, primes or task characteristics influence what comes to mind, as assumed by
knowledge accessibility models. At the second level, contextual variables also influence the
metacognitive experience, that is, how easily information can be retrieved from memory, thoughts can
be generated, or novel material can be processed, giving rise to differential inferences from the same
declarative inputs. At the third level, contextual variables further influence how the metacognitive
experience is interpreted, giving rise to differential inferences from the same experience with
differential downstream implications for inferences from declarative inputs.
The interplay between these different levels is the topic of the present chapter. The first section
addresses the fluency with which new information can be processed, whereas the second section
addresses the fluency of recall and thought generation. Both sections highlight how metacognitive
experiences give rise to different inferences from declarative inputs and how naïve theories of the mind
change the conclusions drawn from a given experience. The third section illustrates how metacognitive
e pe ie es a affe t i di iduals’ hoi e of p o essi g st ategies. The hapte o ludes

oti g

parallels between the use of metacognitive experiences and other feelings as a source of information,
placing the findings in the context of a general feelings-as-information approach to the interplay of
declarative and experiential information (Schwarz, 1990; Schwarz & Clore, 2007). Throughout, the
review is illustrative rather than exhaustive.

THE EASE OF PROCESSING NEW INFORMATION:
PROCESSING FLUENCY
Numerous variables can influence the ease or difficulty with which new information can be
processed. Some of these variables affect the speed and accuracy of low-level processes concerned with
the identification of a stimulus' physical identity and form; they influence perceptual fluency (e.g.,
Jacoby, Kelley & Dywan, 1989). Relevant variables include figure-ground contrast, the clarity with which

Meaning in context -- 3
a stimulus is presented, the duration of its presentation, or the amount of previous exposure to the
stimulus. Other variables influence the speed and accuracy of high-level processes concerned with the
identification of stimulus meaning and its relation to semantic knowledge structures; these variables
influence conceptual fluency (e.g., Whittlesea, 1993). Relevant variables include semantic predictability,
the consistency between the stimulus and its context, and the availability of appropriate mental
concepts for stimulus classification. Empirically, both types of fluency tend to show parallel influences
(for a review see Winkielman, Schwarz, Fazendeiro, & Reber, 2003) and can be subsumed under the
general term processing fluency.
What Does the Experience Mean?
Because the diverse variables that influence processing fluency result in similar
phenomenological experiences of fluent processing, the meaning of the experience is open to
interpretation. Which interpretation people choose, and which inferences they draw from their
experience, depends on which of many applicable naïve theories is brought to mind by the current
context, most notably by the task posed. Some of these theories pertain to characteristics of the
stimulus and presentation conditions, whereas othe s pe tai to o e’s o

state of k o ledge.

Stimulus-related theories include, for example, that it is easier to perceive a stimulus when it is
shown with high rather than low clarity and for a long rather than short duration. These assumptions
affect judgments of clarity and duration, even when the fluency experience is due to some other
variable, like previous exposure to the stimulus. Hence, people who saw the stimulus before infer that
the current presentation lasted longer, or had higher clarity, than people who were not previously
exposed to the stimulus (e.g., Witherspoon & Allan, 1985; Whittlesea, Jacoby & Girard, 1990). Similarly,
Masson and Caldwell (1998) observed that participants inferred that a target word was presented for a
longer duration, or with higher visual clarity, when a preceding semantic task (e.g., complete the
se te e, "A a he shoots a o a d ____" had e de ed the ta get o d a o

highl a essi le.

In these cases, fluency resulting from previous exposure to the stimulus or related concepts gave rise to
erroneous inferences about physical characteristics of the stimulus once the physical judgment task
brought an applicable theory to mind (see Kelley & Rhodes, 2002, for a review).
Other naïve theories relate processi g flue

to o e’s o

state of k o ledge. The

ost

important one holds that familiar (previously seen) material is easier to process than novel material.
Accordingly, people erroneously conclude that novel material is familiar when it is easy to process due
to the influence of other variables. For example, Whittlesea and colleagues (1990) exposed participants
to a study list of rapidly presented words. Subsequently, participants completed a recognition test that

Meaning in context -- 4
manipulated the fluency with which test words could be processed through differential visual clarity. As
expected, test words shown with higher clarity seemed more familiar and were hence more likely to be
e og ized as ha i g appea ed o the p e ious list. This effe t as eli i ated he pa ticipants were
aware that the clarity of the visual presentation was manipulated and hence attributed their fluency
experience to this source, rendering it uninformative for the recognition task.
Fluency and Familiarity: Judgments of Risk, Consensus, and Truth
Fluency-based impressions of familiarity have important implications for a wide range of
judgments that are relevant in daily life, including assessments of risk, social consensus and truth.
Judgments of Risk
Not surprisingly, familiarity figures prominently in intuitive assessments of risk – if a stimulus is
fa ilia a d eli its o egati e

e o ies, it p esu a l has ’t hurt us in the past. Accordingly,

i ide tal a ia les that affe t p o essi g flue

a i flue e peoples’ isk assess e ts. Confirming

this prediction, Song and Schwarz (in press a) observed that ostensible food additives were rated as
more likely to be hazardous when their names were difficult (e.g., Fluthractnip) rather than easy (e.g.,
Magnalroxate) to pronounce. Moreover, the effect of ease of pronunciation on risk ratings was
mediated by the perceived novelty of the stimuli.
Highlighting the real-world implications of this observation, Alter and Oppenheimer (2006)
found that initial public offerings on the New York Stock Exchange provided a higher return on
investment when their ticker symbol was easy (e.g., KAR) rather than difficult to pronounce (e.g., RDO).
This effect was most pronounced on the first day of trading, when investing $1,000 in a basket of stocks
with fluent ticker symbols would have yielded an excess profit of $85.35 over a basket with disfluent
ticker symbols; this advantage was reduced to a still impressive $20.25 by the end of the first year of
trading, as more information about the companies became available.
In addition to the mediating role of perceived familiarity observed by Song and Schwarz (in press
a), intuitive assessments of risk may be further affe ted

pe ei e s’ positive affective response to

fluently processed stimuli (addressed below), consistent with the observation of mood effects on
judgment of risk (e.g., Johnson & Tversky, 1983) and the beneficial influence of sunny weather on the
stock market (e.g., Hirshleifer & Schumway, 2003). Future research may fruitfully address the relative
contributions of familiarity and affect in mediating the observed fluency effects.
Social Consensus and Truth
When the objective truth of a statement is difficult to evaluate, people often draw on social
consensus information to arrive at a judgment, based on the assumption that what many people believe

Meaning in context -- 5
is p o a l t ue Festi ge , 9

. To dete

i e hethe the

hea d it efo e, people

a assess the

apparent familiarity of the information, drawing on the fluency with which it can be processed as a
relevant input (e.g., Weaver, Garcia, Schwarz, & Miller, 2007). If so, variables that increase processing
fluency should increase the perceived truth value of the processed information. Empirically, this is the
case.
Not surprisingly, one relevant variable is actual exposure frequency. In a classic study of rumor
transmission, Allport and Lepkin (1945) observed that the strongest predictor of belief in wartime
rumors was simple repetition. Numerous subsequent studies demonstrated that a given statement is
more likel to e judged t ue the

o e ofte it is epeated. This illusio of t uth effe t Begg, A as, &

Farinacci, 1992) has been obtained with trivia statements or words from a foreign language (e.g.,
Hasher, Goldstein, & Toppino, 1977) as well as advertising materials (e.g., Hawkins & Hoch, 1992).
Illusions of truth are even observed when participants are explicitly told at the time of exposure
that the information is false. Skurnik, Yoon, Schwarz, and Park (2005) exposed older and younger adults
once o th i e to p odu t state e ts like, “ha k a tilage is good fo
state e ts e e e pli itl

ou a th itis a d these

a ked as t ue o false. As may be expected, all participants were less

likely to accept a statement as true the more often they were told that it is false – but only when they
were tested immediately. After a three-day delay, repeated warnings backfired for older adults: They
were now more likely to assume that a statement is true, the more often they were explicitly told that it
is false. This finding is consistent with the observation that explicit memory declines with age, whereas
implicit memory remains largely intact (Park, 2000). Hence, after a three day delay, older adults could
not recall whether the statement was originally marked as true or false, but still experienced its content
as highly familiar, leading them to accept it as true. Ironically, this mechanism turns warnings into
recommendations, with important implications for public education campaigns (for a review see
Schwarz, Sanna, Skurnik, & Yoon, 2007).
Theoretically, any other variable that increases processing fluency should have the same effect
as message repetition. Supporting this prediction, Reber and Schwarz (1999) found that participants
were more likely to accept statements like "Osorno is a city in Chile" as true when the statements were
presented in colors that made them easy (e.g., dark blue) rather than difficult (e.g., light blue) to read
against the background. Similarly, McGlone and Tofighbakhsh (2000) manipulated processing fluency by
presenting substantively equivalent novel aphorisms in a rhyming (e.g., "woes unite foes") or nonrhyming form (e.g., "woes unite enemies"). As expected, participants judged substantively equivalent
aphorisms as more true when they rhymed than when they did not.

Meaning in context -- 6
In combination, these findings indicate that processing fluency serves as an experiential basis of
truth judgments. In the absence of more diagnostic information, people draw on the apparent
familiarity of the statement to infer its likely truth value. This inference is based on the (usually correct)
assumption that widely shared opinions are both more likely to be familiar and more likely to be correct
than more idiosyncratic ones. Hence, if it seems like the hea d it efo e, the e’s p o a l so ethi g to
it. By the same token, people should infer that apparently familiar information is likely to be false when
they have reason to believe that false information is more common in the given context. Empirically,
this is the case and flue

a

esult i i fe e es of t uth o false ess, depe di g o people’s

assumptions about the prevalence of truth and falseness in the relevant environment (e.g., Skurnik,
Schwarz, & Winkielman, 2000; Unkelbach, 2007).

Fluency and Affect: Judgments of Preference and Beauty
The judgment effects reviewed so far can be plausibly traced to inferences that are based on the
experience of fluent processing itself. However, a second factor contributes to the pervasive influence of
processing fluency. High processing fluency is experienced as pleasant and elicits a positive affective
reaction that can be captured with psychophysiological measures (Winkielman & Cacioppo, 2001). The
positive affective reaction, in turn, can itself serve as a basis of judgment, providing an alternative
pathway for fluency effects that is particularly relevant to judgments of preference (Winkielman,
Schwarz, Fazendeiro, & Reber, 2003). What is less clear is why processing fluency is experienced as
affectively positive. Relevant proposals range from the adaptive value of a preference for familiar stimuli
(Zajonc, 1968) to the adaptive value of fast stimulus identification (Winkielman, Schwarz, & Nowak,
2002) and their empirical evaluation awaits further research.
In his classic demonstration of the mere exposure effect, Zajonc (1968; for a review see
Bornstein, 1989) showed that repeated exposure to a stimulus results in more positive evaluations and
several researchers suggested that this observation is a function of increased processing fluency (e.g.,
Jacoby et al., 1989; Seamon, Brody & Kauff, 1983). If so, any variable that facilitates fluent processing
should also facilitate positive evaluations, even with a single exposure. Numerous studies support this
prediction. For example, Reber, Winkielman, and Schwarz (1998) presented participants with slightly
degraded pictures of everyday objects and manipulated processing fluency through a visual priming
procedure. Depending on conditions, the target picture was preceded by a subliminally presented,
highly degraded contour of either the target picture or a different picture. As predicted, pictures
preceded by matched contours were recognized faster, indicating higher fluency, and were liked more

Meaning in context -- 7
than pictures preceded by mismatched contours. Extending this work, Winkielman and Fazendeiro
(reported in Winkielman et al. 2003) showed participants unambiguous pictures of common objects and
manipulated processing fluency through semantic primes. In the high fluency condition, the picture
e.g., of a lo k
asso iati el
s o

as p e eded

a

elated o d e.g., ke

at hi g o d e.g., lo k , i the
, a d i the lo flue

o ditio

ode ate flue

o ditio

a

a u elated o d e.g.,

. As p edi ted, pictures preceded by matching words were liked more than pictures preceded by

related words, which, in turn, were liked more than pictures preceded by unrelated words. This positive
effect of processing fluency was eliminated when participants attributed their positive affective
response to music played in the background, as has previously been observed for the influence of
moods (Schwarz & Clore, 1983).
Lee and Labroo (2004; see also Labroo, Dhar, & Schwarz, 2008) obtained similar findings in the
consumer domain. They found, for example, that consumers reported more positive attitudes toward
ketchup when they were previously exposed to a closely related product (mayonnaise) rather than an
unrelated one. Presumably, the closely related product facilitated processing of the target product,
much as related semantic primes facilitated processing of the target pictures in Winkielman and
Faze dei o’s stud .
Numerous other variables that affect processing fluency produce parallel effects, from figureground contrast and presentation duration (e.g., Reber et al. 1998) to the prototypicality of the stimulus
(e.g., Halberstadt & Rhodes 2000; Langlois & Roggman 1990). Moreover, the influence of many
variables addressed in the psychology of aesthetics (Arnheim 1974), like figural goodness, symmetry,
and information density, can be traced to the mediating role of processing fluency: All of these variables
facilitate stimulus identification and elicit more positive evaluations. Based on these and related
findings, Reber, Schwarz, and Winkielman (2004) proposed a fluency theory of aesthetic pleasure that
assigns a central role to the perceiver's processing dynamics: The more fluently perceivers can process a
stimulus, the more positive is their aesthetic response. This proposal provides an integrative account of
diverse variables and traces their influence to the same underlying process. First, image variables that
have long been known to influence aesthetic judgments, like figural goodness, figure-ground contrast,
symmetry, and prototypicality, exert their influence by facilitating or impairing fluent processing of the
stimulus. Second, perceiver variables, like a history of previous exposure or a motivational state to which
the stimulus is relevant, similarly exert their influence through processing fluency. Third, contextual
variables, like visual or semantic priming, that play no role in traditional theories of aesthetics operate in
the same fashion and also affect aesthetic appreciation through their influence on processing fluency.

Meaning in context -- 8
Finally, it is worth noting that the relationship between perceived familiarity and affective
response is bi-directional. As Monin (2003) demonstrated, stimuli that evoke a positive affective
response are judged more familiar, even when fluency of processing is controlled for. Similarly, GarciaMarques and Mackie (2001) observed that participants in a good mood are more likely to perceive novel
arguments as familiar, which may contribute to their acceptance as true.
Summary
In sum, processing fluency influences judgment through two related pathways. First, people
attend to the dynamics of their own information processing and draw on the experience of fluent or
disfluent processing as a source of information. What they conclude from their fluency experiences,
however, depends on which of many potentially applicable naïve theories of information processing is
brought to mind by contextual variables, most notably the task posed.
Second, high fluency elicits spontaneous positive affective reactions, which provide further experiential
information, paralleling the influence of moods and emotions. Neither source of experiential
information exerts an influence when its informational value for the judgment at hand is called into
question. This is the case when judges are aware that their fluency experience (for a review see Kelley &
Rhodes, 2002) or apparent affective reaction to the target (for a review see Schwarz & Clore, 2007) is
due to an irrelevant source.
Finally, some phenomena are likely to reflect the operation of both processes. For example,
studying the role of processing fluency in consumer choice, Novemsky and colleagues (2007) presented
participants with descriptions of two digital cameras. As expected, participants were less likely to defer
choice when the print font of the description was easy (56% deferral) rather than difficult to read (71%
deferral), unless their attention was explicitly drawn to the font (57% deferral). This result may reflect
that the described cameras seemed less attractive under low fluency conditions or that the information
seemed less familiar and credible, both of which could contribute to a higher rate of deferral.
THE EASE OF RECALL AND THOUGHT GENERATION:
ACCESSIBILITY EXPERIENCES
The same conceptual logic applies to the ease or difficulty of recall and thought generation.
Information can be easy or difficult to bring to mind for many different reasons and what people
conclude from these accessibility experiences depends on which of many naïve theories of mental
processes they bring to bear. Some naïve theories link accessibility experiences to characteristics of the
object of judgment, like the frequency or temporal distance of events, whereas others link them to the
state of o e’s o

k o ledge, like o e’s expertise or interest, or to characteristics of the current

Meaning in context -- 9
situation, like factors that may be distracting. Whenever the experience is attributed to a source that is
irrelevant to the target judgment, its informational value is discredited and people draw on other inputs,
usually the declarative information they brought to mind.
What Does the Experience Mean?
One widely applicable naïve theory holds that the more exemplars exist, the easier it is to bring
some to mind. This correct belief is at the heart of T e sk a d Kah e a ’s

97

a aila ilit heu isti

and people infer higher frequency and probability from ease of recall. Because frequent exemplars are
also more typical for their category, ease of recall further suggests high typicality. Accordingly, people
infer that they use their bicycles more often after recalling few rather than many instances (Aarts &
Dijksterhuis, 1999); rate themselves as more assertive after recalling few rather than many of their own
assertive behaviors (Schwarz et al., 1991); like Tony Blair more after listing few rather than many of
favorable thoughts about him (Haddock, 2002); hold an attitude with more confidence after generating
few rather than many supporting arguments (Haddock et al., 1999); consider an event more likely the
more reasons they generate for why it might not have occurred (Sanna, Schwarz, & Stocker, 2002); and
are more likely to defer choice after listing many rather than few reasons for making a choice
(Novemsky et al., 2007).
When people apply this naïve theory, their inferences are consistent with the implications of
what comes to mind when recall or thought generation is easy, but opposite to these implications when
it is difficult. Several lines of evidence indicate that these effects are due to metacognitive experiences
rather than to differences in the quality of examples listed. First, external raters detect no quality
difference between the first and last two examples listed (e.g., Schwarz et al., 1991). Second, yoked
participants, who merely read the thoughts generated by another and are hence deprived of the
generation experience, are more influenced when their partner lists many rather than few arguments, in
contrast to the person who lists them (e.g., Wänke, Bless, & Biller, 1996). Third, and most important, the
impact of metacognitive experiences is eliminated when the experience is misattributed to an external
influence, like music played in the background. In this case, participants draw on accessible content, and
rate themselves as more assertive the more examples of assertive behavior they listed, thus reversing
the otherwise observed pattern (Schwarz et al., 1991; for conceptual replications see Haddock et al.,

Meaning in context -- 10
1999; Novemsky et al., 2007; Sanna, Schwarz, & Small, 2002).1 Finally, the same effect can be observed
when all participants list the same number of thoughts and their subjective experience of difficulty is
manipulated through facial feedback in the form of corrugator contraction, an expression associated
with mental effort (e.g., Stepper & Strack, 1993; Sanna, Schwarz, & Small, 2002).
Other naïve theories of memory correctly hold, for example, that it is easier to recall events that
are well rather than poorly represented in memory; that one found important when they occurred; or
that happened in the recent rather than distant past. Accordingly, people infer higher childhood
amnesia after successfully recalling 12 rather than 4 childhood events (Winkielman, Schwarz, & Belli,
1998) and consider past events less important, and date them as having occurred at a more distant
time, after recalling many rather than few details (Schwarz & Xu, 2008). People further assume that it is
easie to e all

ate ial i o e’s do ai of interest and that a lack of expertise renders recall and

thought generation difficult. Hence, they infer, for example, that they are not very interested in politics
when they find it difficult to answer political knowledge question – unless they can attribute the
difficulty to an external source, like a lack of media coverage (Schwarz & Schuman, 1997). Conversely,
attributing any experienced diffi ult to o e’s la k of k o ledge e de s it uninformative judgments
about states of the world (e.g., Sanna & Schwarz, 2003).
Determinants and Consequences of Theory Selection
Given that different naïve theories are applicable to the same accessibility experience, it is
important to understand the determinants of their use. As in the case of fluency experiences, a key
determinant is the judgment task itself, which recruits an applicable inference rule that allows the
pe ei e to get f o

he e the a aila le data to the e the judg e t of i te est . For example,

Schwarz and Xu (2008 asked stude ts to list t o o si

fi e Italia

estau a ts i to

. Whe fi st

asked how many fine Italian restaurants the city has, they inferred from the difficulty of listing six that
the e a ’t e

a . This i fe e e is o siste t ith T e sk a d Kah e a ’s

97

a aila ilit

These findings also bear on Tormala a d olleagues’
7 o se atio that pa ti ipa ts ho attempt
to list many thoughts may also have more unrequested thoughts; for example, those asked to list many
favorable thoughts may also find a larger number of unfavorable thoughts coming to mind. They
suggested that these unrequested thoughts, rather than the experience of difficulty per se, may drive
the e ie ed effe ts. If so, the patte of pa ti ipa ts’ judg e ts should ot e e se he the
diagnostic value of the metacognitive experience is called into question – att i uti g o e’s diffi ult to
background music (Schwarz et al., 1991), for example, does nothing to discredit the substantive
relevance of any unrequested thoughts one might have had. While unrequested thoughts are probably
part and parcel of the experience of difficulty, they do not provide a coherent account of the available
findings.
1

Meaning in context -- 11
heuristic. However, when first asked how much they know about town, they inferred from the same
difficulty that they are quite unfamiliar with their college town. Theoretically, each of these judgments
entails an attribution of the recall experience to a specific source, either to the number of restaurants in
town o to o e’s o

e pe tise. O e this i pli it att i utio is

ade, the e pe ie e is e plai ed a d

should become uninformative for judgments that require a different theory, making it likely that people
turn to accessible thought content instead. Confirming this prediction, participants who first concluded
that there are few fine Italian restaurants in town subsequently reported high expertise—after all, there
a e ’t

a

su h estau a ts a d the

e e theless ould list uite a fe , so the

ust k o a lot

about town. Conversely, those who first concluded that their difficulty reflects a lack of knowledge
subsequently inferred that there are many fine Italian restaurants—after all, they had listed quite a few
and they did ’t even know much about town.
In a conceptual replication, Schwarz and Xu (2008) asked participants to recall details of the
Oklahoma City bombing. When first asked to date the event, they inferred that it was more recent after
recalling two rather than ten details; but when first asked how important the event was to them at the
time, they inferred higher importance after recalling two rather than ten details. Again, these judgments
entail an attribution of the experience to a specific cause (here, recency or importance), rendering the
experience uninformative for other judgments. Accordingly, participants who initially attributed the
diffi ult of e alli g

a

details to the e e t’s te po al dista e su se ue tl

epo ted that the

event was quite important to them–-after all, they had just recalled numerous details even though the
event had apparently happened long ago. Conversely, participants who initially attributed difficulty of
recall to low personal importance subsequently dated the event as closer in time – after all, they could
still recall numerous details despite the e e t’s lo pe so al i po ta e.
Summary
In sum, recall and thought generation can be experienced as easy or difficult. What people
conclude from these accessibility experiences depends on which of many potentially applicable naïve
theories of memory and cognition is brought to mind by the present context. In most cases, applicable
theories are recruited by the judgment task and the same experience can result in different substantive
conclusions, depending on the specific theory applied. Moreover, every theory-based judgment entails a
causal attribution of the experience to the source specified in the naïve theory. Accordingly, the first
judgment can serve as a context that undermines the informational value of the experience for later
judgments that require the application of a different theory, much as has been observed for other
(mis)attribution manipulations (for a review see Schwarz & Clore, 2007). Once the informational value of

Meaning in context -- 12
the experience is called into question, people turn to the content of their thoughts as an alternative
source of information. Hence, subsequent judgments are content rather than experience based,
resulting in a reversal of the otherwise observed effects.
While numerous studies converge on the conclusion that people will only rely on their
metacognitive experiences when their informational value is not called into question (Schwarz & Clore,
2007), less is known about the conditions that determine the relative impact of experiential and
declarative information. On the one hand, some findings are compatible with a conceptualization of
metacognitive experiences as heuristic cues that are more likely to dominate judgment when processing
motivation (e.g., Rothman & Schwarz, 1998) or capacity (e.g., Greifeneder & Bless, 2008) are low. On the
othe ha d, flue t p o essi g usuall i

eases people’s o fide e i the o te t of thei thoughts

(e.g., by suggesting high expertise or a large body of supportive evidence), which exerts more influence
on judgment when processing motivation and capacity are high (for a review see Petty et al., 2007).
Hence, metacognitive experiences are likely to influence judgment under heuristic/intuitive as well as
systematic/analytic processing conditions. A systematic exploration of these contingencies promises
further insight into the contextualized interplay of experiential and declarative information in human
reasoning.
METACOGNITIVE EXPERIENCES AND THE CHOICE OF PROCESSING STRATEGIES
As already seen, people draw on their metacognitive experiences to assess their own knowledge
and various task characteristics. These assessments also inform their choice of processing strategies.
When asked to answer a question, for example, people may feel that they know the correct answer
even though they are currently unable to bring it to mind. In many cases, this feeling of knowing is based
on the ease with which partial information comes to mind (Koriat, 1993); in other cases it is based on
the apparent familiarity of the cues provided in the question (Reder & Ritter, 1992). In either case,
people are more likely to engage in detailed retrieval efforts the higher their feeling of knowing (e.g.,
Costermans, Lories, & Ansay, 1992). On the other hand, easy retrieval of a plausible answer results in
high confidence and truncates the search process, making more detailed scrutiny of the answer unlikely
(for a discussion see Petty, Brinol, Tormala, & Wegener, 2007).
While the a o e p o essi g de isio s a e ased o assess e ts of o e’s own knowledge,
metacognitive experiences are likely to inform a wide range of strategy choices, a possibility that awaits
systematic investigation. In general, people prefer processing strategies that have been characterized as
analytic, systematic, bottom-up and detail-oriented when they consider their current situation
p o le ati ,

ut p efe st ategies that ha e ee

ha a te ized as i tuiti e, heu isti , a d top-down

Meaning in context -- 13
he the

o side thei u e t situatio as

e ig

(Schwarz, 1990). Numerous variables, from task

characteristics to incidental environmental cues, moods, and bodily approach or avoidance feedback can
convey this information and have been found to influence processing style (for reviews see Schwarz,
2002; Schwarz & Clore, 2007). One of these variables is the fluency with which information can be
p o essed. Fo e a ple, he asked, Ho

a

a i als of ea h ki d did Moses take o the a h?

ost people a s e t o despite k o i g that the i li al a to

as Noah (Erickson & Mattson, 1981).

Presenting this Moses question in a difficult to read print font dramatically reduces reliance on the first
answer that comes to mind and increases the recognition that the question cannot be answered as
asked; on the other hand, a difficult to read print font impairs performance when the first spontaneous
association is correct (Song & Schwarz, in press b). Both observations presumably reflect that familiar
questions, and the associations they bring to mind, receive less scrutiny than unfamiliar ones. Similarly,
Alter, Oppenheimer, Epley, and Norwick (2007) reported that manipulations that increased subjective
p o essi g diffi ult i p o ed pa ti ipa ts’ pe fo

a eo

easo i g tasks that e efit f o

a

oe

analytic processing style.
Note, however, that the influence of metacognitive experiences on strategy choice is bound to
be as malleable as their influence on judgment. Inferring that the task is unfamiliar, for example, may
abort any attempt to engage in effortful analytic processing when the task seems to require background
knowledge that one is likel to la k, gi e the task’s lo fa ilia it . Future research may fruitfully
explore how contextual variables that shape the inferences drawn from a given metacognitive
experience affect subsequent strategy choices.
CODA
After decades of pervasive "neglect of conscious experience" (Tulving, 1989, p. 4), it is now
increasingly acknowledged that an understanding of human cognition requires attention to the
subjective experiences that accompany cognitive processes. Consideration of these experiences adds
e

o ple it to theo izi g a out the

i di

o te t, e e if e li it the o te t to the i

ediate

task environment and ignore the broader social and cultural context in which it is embedded. As
numerous social cognition studies into the effects of knowledge accessibility demonstrated (for reviews
see Higgins, 1996; Förster & Liberman, 2007), contextual variables influence what comes to mind and
which declarative information is used in forming a judgment. Knowing the accessible declarative inputs,
however, is insufficient to predict the final judgment because the implications of the declarative
information are qualified by accompanying subjective experiences (Schwarz & Clore, 2007), including
the metacognitive experiences reviewed in this chapter. These metacognitive experiences, in turn, are

Meaning in context -- 14
themselves a function of contextual variables that influence how easily information can be retrieved
from memory, thoughts can be generated, or novel material can be processed. Moreover, what people
conclude from the experience of easy or difficult processing depends on which of many potentially
applicable naïve theories of mental processes they bring to bear, which is again a function of contextual
variables, most notably the task on their mind. Finally, application of a given theory to form an initial
judgment entails an attribution of the experience to a specific source, which renders the experience
uninformative for subsequent judgments that require the application of a different theory. Hence, the
final judgment emerges from a systematic interplay of accessible declarative and experiential inputs,
each of which is subject to multiple contextual influences – and a minor change in context, like the order
in which two questions are asked (Schwarz & Xu, 2008), may be sufficient to reverse the otherwise
obtained outcome.
What are we to make of this contextual malleability of human judgment? Taking the reviewed
experiments at face value, our perception of reality is subject to numerous haphazard influences,
leaving one to wonder how we make it through the day. From a broader perspective however, the
observed contextual malleability is compatible with the assumption that thinking is for doing (James,
1890), which requires high sensitivity to the context in which things are to be done (see Smith & Collins,
this volume). Hence, information that is relevant in a given context should indeed be privileged at the
expense of less relevant information, making context dependent knowledge accessibility an adaptive
feature. The accompanying metacognitive experience that the information comes to mind easily may
further highlight its relevance, giving it an advantage over less accessible and presumably less relevant
information. Similarly, the fluency with which new information can be processed will indeed often
reflect previous exposure, making it a valid indicator of familiarity. Moreover, the meaning that we
impose on a given metacognitive experience should indeed be the meaning that is most relevant to the
task at hand and the recruitment of task-relevant naïve theories facilitates this. From this perspective,
the basic processes identified in the present chapter are adaptive rather than dysfunctional.
Unfortunately, however, this is only part of the story. While we are very sensitive to our
subjective experiences, we are utterly insensitive to their source. We mistake our pre-existing moods as
our reaction to the object of judgment (e.g., Schwarz & Clore, 1983), fail to recognize that recall is only
difficult because we are asked to recall too large a number of examples (e.g., Schwarz et al., 1991), and
we misread the fluency resulting from easy or difficult to read presentation formats (e.g., Reber &
Schwarz, 1999) as indicative of the actual familiarity of the material. Throughout, we treat our thoughts
and feelings as bearing on the specific task at hand and rarely consider the possible influence of

Meaning in context -- 15
incidental variables, unless our attention is explicitly drawn to them (Higgins, 1998; Schwarz, 1990).
While the resulting errors of judgment may be less common in the wild than in experiments with
carefully managed incidental influences, the emergence of fluency (Alter & Oppenheimer, 2006) and
mood (Hirshleifer & Shumway, 2003) effects on stock prices illustrates that they are certainly not
restricted to laboratory studies with inconsequential tasks. Being blissfully unaware of incidental
influences and alternative interpretations, we experience our judgments as a compelling reflection of
reality, although a different question may result in the construction of a different reality from the same
inputs – a naïve realism that protects us from a continuous sense of uncertainty (see Dunham & Banaji,
this volume, and Ross & Ward, 1996, for related discussions).

Meaning in context -- 16
REFERENCES
Aarts, H. & Dijksterhuis, A. (1999). How often did I do it? Experienced
ease of retrieval and frequency estimates of past behavior. Acta Psychologica, 103, 77-89.
Allport, F.H., & Lepkin, M. (1945). Wartime rumors of waste and special privilege: Why some
people believe them. Journal of Abnormal and Social Psychology, 40, 3-36.
Alter, A. L. & Oppenheimer, D. M. (2006). Predicting short-term stock fluctuations by using
processing fluency. Proceedings of the National Academy of Science, 103, 9369-9372.
Alter, A. A., Oppenheimer, D. M., Epley, N., & Norwick, R. (2007). Overcoming intuition:
Metacognitive difficulty activates analytic reasoning. Unpublished manuscript, Princeton University.
Arnheim, R. (1974). Art and visual perception: A psychology of the creative eye. Berkeley, CA:
University of California Press.
Begg, I. M., Anas, they are certainly not restricted to experiments as A., & Farinacci, S. (1992).
Dissociation of processes in belief: Source recollection, statement familiarity, and the illusion of truth.
Journal of Experimental Psychology: General, 121, 446-458.
Bornstein, R. F. (1989). Exposure and affect: Overview and meta-analysis of research 1968-1987.
Psychological Bulletin, 106, 265-289.
Cacioppo, J. T., Petty, R. E., Losch, M. E., & Kim, H. S. (1986). Electromyographic activity over
facial muscle regions can differentiate the valence and intensity of affective reactions. Journal of
Personality and Social Psychology, 50, 260-268.
Costermans, J., Lories, G., & Ansay, C. (1992). Confidence level and feeling of knowing in
question answering. Journal of Experimental Psychology: Learning, Memory, and Cognition, 18, 142-150.
Dunham, Y., & Banaji, M. R. (in press). Platonic blindness and the challenge of understanding
context. In L. Feldman Barrett, B. Mesquita, & E.R. Smith (eds.), The mind in context (pp. 00 – 00). New
York: Guilford.
Erickson, T. A., & Mattson, M. E. (1981). From words to meaning: A semantic illusion. Journal of
Verbal Learning and Verbal Behavior, 20, 540-552.
Festinger, L. (1954). A theory of social comparison processes. Human Relations, 7, 123-146.
Florack, A., & Zoabi, H. (2003). Risikoverhalten bei Aktiengeschäften: Wenn Anleger nachdenklich
werden. [Risk behavior in share transactions: When investors think about reasons.] Zeitschrift für
Sozialpsychologie, 34, 65-78.
Förster, J., & Liberman, N. (2007). Knowledge activation. In A. Kruglanski & E. T. Higgins (eds.),
Social psychology. Handbook of basic principles (2nd ed.; pp. 201-231). New York: Guilford.

Meaning in context -- 17
Garcia-Marques, T., & Mackie, D.M. (2001). The feeling of familiarity as a regulator of persuasive
processing. Social Cognition, 19, 9-34.
Goldinger, S.D., Kleider, H.M., & Shelley, E. (1999). The marriage of perception and memory:
Creating two-way illusions between words and voices. Memory & Cognition, 27, 328-338.
Greifeneder, R. & Bless, H. (2007). Relying on accessible content vs. accessibility experiences:
The case of processing capacity. Social Cognition, 25, 853-881.
Haddo k, G.

. It’s eas to like o dislike To

Blai : A essi ilit e pe ie es a d the

favorability of attitude judgments. British Journal of Social Psychology, 93, 257-267.
Haddock, G., Rothman, A.J., Reber, R., & Schwarz, N. (1999). Forming judgments of attitude
certainty, importance, and intensity: The role of subjective experiences. Personality and Social
Psychology Bulletin, 25, 771-782.
Halberstadt, J., & Rhodes, G. (2000). The attractiveness of nonface average: Implications for an
evolutionary explanation of the attractiveness of average faces. Psychological Science, 11, 285-289.
Hasher, L., Goldstein, D., & Toppino, T. (1977). Frequency and the conference of referential
validity. Journal of Verbal Learning and Verbal Behavior, 16, 107-112.
Hawkins, S.A., & Hoch, S.J. (1992). Low-involvement learning: Memory without evaluation.
Journal of Consumer Research, 19, 212-225.
Higgins, E. T. (1996). Knowledge activation: Accessibility, applicability, and salience. In E. T.
Higgins & A. Kruglanski (Eds.), Social psychology: Handbook of basic principles (pp. 133-168). New York:
Guilford Press.
Higgins, E. T. (1998). The aboutness principle: A pervasive influence on human inference. Social
Cognition, 16, 173-198.
Hirshleifer, D., & Shumway, T. (2003). Good day sunshine: Stock returns and the weather.
Journal of Finance,58, 1009-1032.
Jacoby, L. L., Allan, L. G., Collins, J. C., Larwill, L. K. (1988). Memory influences subjective
experience: Noise judgments. Journal of Experimental Psychology: Learning, Memory, and Cognition, 14,
240-247.
Jacoby, L.L., Kelley, C.M., Brown, J., & Jaseschko, J. (1989). Becoming famous overnight: Limits
on the ability to avoid unconscious influences of the past. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology,
56, 326-338.

Meaning in context -- 18
Jacoby, L. L., Kelley, C. M., & Dywan, J. (1989). Memory attributions. In H.L. Roediger, & F.I.M.
Craik (Eds.), Varieties of memory and consciousness: Essays in honour of Endel Tulving (pp. 391-422).
Hillsdale, NJ: Erlbaum.
Johnson, E., & Tversky, A. (1983). Affect, generalization, and the perception of risk. Journal of
Personality and Social Psychology, 45, 20-31.
Kelley, C. M., & Rhodes, M. G. (2002). Making sense and nonsense of experience: Attributions in
memory and judgment. The Psychology of Learning and Motivation, 41, 293-320.
Koriat, A. (1993). How do we know that we know? The accessibility model of the feeling of
knowing. Psychological Review, 100, 609-639.
Labroo, A. A., Dhar, R., & Schwarz, N. (2008). Of frog wines and smiling watches: Semantic
priming of perceptual features and brand evaluation. Journal of Consumer Research, 34, 819-831.
Langlois, J. H., & Roggman, L.A. (1990). Attractive faces are only average. Psychological Science,
1, 115-121.
Lee, A.Y., & Labroo, A.A. (2004). The effect of conceptual and perceptual fluency on brand
evaluation. Journal of Marketing Research, 41, 151-165.
Masson, M.E.J., & Caldwell, J.I. (1998). Conceptually driven encoding episodes create perceptual
misattributions. Acta Psychologica, 98, 183-210.
McGlone, M. S., & Tofighbakhsh, J. (2000). Birds of a feather flock conjointly (?): Rhyme as
reason in aphorisms. Psychological Science, 11, 424-428.
Monin, B. (2003). The warm glow heuristic: When liking leads to familiarity. Journal of
Personality and Social Psychology, 85, 1035-1048.
Novemsky, N., Dhar, R., Schwarz, N., & Simonson, I. (2007). Preference fluency in choice. Journal
of Marketing Research, 44, 347-356.
Park, D.C. (2000). The basic mechanisms accounting for age-related decline in cognitive function.
In Park, D. C. & Schwarz, N. (Eds). Cognitive aging: A primer (pp 3-22). Philadelphia, PA: Psychology
Press.
Petty, R.E., Brinol, P., Tormala, Z.L., & Wegener, D.T. (2007). The role of metacognition in social
judgment. In A. Kruglanski & E. T. Higgins (eds.), Social psychology. Handbook of basic principles (2nd ed.;
pp. 254-284). New York: Guilford.
Reber, R., & Schwarz, N. (1999). Effects of perceptual fluency on judgments of truth.
Consciousness and Cognition, 8, 338-342.

Meaning in context -- 19
Reber, R., Schwarz, N., & Winkielman, P. (2004). Processing fluency and aesthetic pleasure: Is
beauty in the perceiver's processing experience? Personality and Social Psychology Review, 8, 364-382.
Reber, R., Winkielman P., & Schwarz N. (1998). Effects of perceptual fluency on affective
judgments. Psychological Science, 9, 45-48.
Reder, L. M., & Ritter, F.E. (1992). What determines initial feelings of knowing? Familiarity with
question terms, not with answers. Journal of Experimental Psychology: Learning, Memory, &
Cognition,18, 435-451.
Ross, L., & Ward, A. (1996). Naïve realism in everyday life: Implications for social conflict and
misunderstanding. In E. S. Reed, E. Turiel, & T. Brown (eds.), Values and knowledge (pp. 103-135).
Hillsdale, NJ: Erlbaum.
Rothman, A. J., & Schwarz, N. (1998). Constructing perceptions of vulnerability: Personal
relevance and the use of experiential information in health judgments. Personality and Social Psychology
Bulletin, 24, 1053-1064.
Ruder, M., & Bless, H. (2003). Mood and the reliance on the ease of retrieval heuristic. Journal of
Personality and Social Psychology, 85, 20-32.
Sanna, L.J., & Schwarz, N. (2003). Debiasing hindsight: The role of accessibility experiences and
attributions. Journal of Experimental Social Psychology, 39, 287-295.
Sanna, L., Schwarz, N., & Small, E. (2002). Accessibility experiences and the hindsight bias: Iknew-it-all-along versus It-could-never-have-happened. Memory & Cognition, 30, 1288-1296.
Sanna, L.J., Schwarz, N., & Stocker, S.L. (2002). When debiasing backfires: Accessible content and
accessibility experiences in debiasing hindsight. Journal of Experimental Psychology: Learning, Memory,
Cognition, 28, 497-502.
Schwarz, N. (1990). Feelings as information: Informational and motivational functions of
affective states. In E. T. Higgins & R. M. Sorrentino (Eds.), Handbook of motivation and cognition:
Foundations of social behavior (Vol. 2; pp. 527-561). New York, NY: Guilford Press.
Schwarz, N. (2002). Situated cognition and the wisdom of feelings: Cognitive tuning. In L.
Feldman Barrett & P. Salovey (Eds.), The wisdom in feelings (pp.144-166). New York: Guilford.
Schwarz, N. (2007). Attitude construction: Evaluation in context. Social Cognition, 25, 638-656.
Schwarz, N., Bless, H., Strack, F., Klumpp, G., Rittenauer-Schatka, H., & Simons, A. (1991). Ease
of retrieval as information: Another look at the availability heuristic. Journal of Personality and Social
Psychology, 61, 195-202.

Meaning in context -- 20
Schwarz, N., & Clore, G.L. (1983). Mood, misattribution, and judgments of well-being:
Informative and directive functions of affective states. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 45,
513-523.
Schwarz, N., & Clore, G. L. (2007). Feelings and phenomenal experiences. In A. Kruglanski & E. T.
Higgins (eds.), Social psychology. Handbook of basic principles (2nd ed.; pp. 385-407). New York: Guilford.
Schwarz, N., Sanna, L., Skurnik, I., & Yoon, C. (2007). Metacognitive experiences and the
intricacies of setting people straight: Implications for debiasing and public information campaigns.
Advances in Experimental Social Psychology, 39, 127-161.
Schwarz, N., & Schuman, H. (1997). Political knowledge, attribution, and inferred political
interest: The operation of buffer items. International Journal of Public Opinion Research, 9, 191-195.
Schwarz, N., & Xu, J. (2008). Constructing heuristics on the spot: Divergent inferences from ease
of recall. Manuscript, University of Michigan.
Seamon, J. G., Brody, N., & Kauff, D. M. (1983). Affective discrimination of stimuli that are not
recognized: Effects of shadowing, masking, and central laterality. Journal of Experimental Psychology:
Learning, Memory and Cognition, 9, 544-555.
Simonson, I. (1989). Choice based on reasons: The case of attraction and compromise effects.
Journal of Consumer Research, 16, 158-174.
Sinclair, R.C., Soldat, A.S., & Mark, M. M. (1998). Affective cues and processing strategy: Color
coded forms influence performance. Teaching of Psychology, 25, 130-132.
Skurnik, I., Schwarz, N., & Winkielman, P. (2000). Drawing inferences from feelings: The role of
naive beliefs. In H. Bless & J. Forgas (Eds.), The message within: The role of subjective experience in social
cognition and behavior (pp. 162-175). Philadelphia, PA: Psychology Press.
Skurnik, I., Yoon, C., Park, D.C., & Schwarz, N. (2005). How warnings about false claims become
recommendations. Journal of Consumer Research, 31, 713-724.
Smith, E.R., & Collins, E.C. (in press). Situated cognition. In L. Feldman Barrett, B. Mesquita, &
E.R. Smith (eds.), The mind in context (pp. 00 – 00). New York: Guilford.
Smith, E.R., & Semin, G.R. (2004). Socially situated cognition: Cognition in its social context.
Advances in Experimental Social Psychology, 36, 53-117.
Song, H., & Schwarz, N. (in press a). If it’s difficult-to-pronounce, it must be risky: Processing
fluency and risk perception. Psychological Science.
Song, H., & Schwarz, N. (in press b). Fluency and the detection of distortions: Low processing
fluency attenuates the Moses illusion. Social Cognition.

Meaning in context -- 21
Stepper, S., & Strack F. (1993). Proprioceptive determinants of emotional and nonemotional
feelings. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 64, 211-220.
Tormala, Z.L., Petty, R.E., & Brinol, P. (2002). Ease of retrieval effects in persuasion: A selfvalidation analysis. Personality and Social Psychology Bulletin, 28, 1700-1712.
Tormala, Z. L., Falces, C., Brinol, P., & Petty, R.E. (2007). Ease of retrieval effects in social
judgment: The role of unrequested cognitions. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 93,143-157.
Tulving, E. (1989). Memory: Performance, knowledge, and experience. European Journal of
Cognitive Psychology, 1, 3-26.
Tversky, A., & Kahneman, D. (1973). Availability: A heuristic for judging frequency and
probability. Cognitive Psychology, 5, 207-232.
Unkelbach, C. (2007). Reversing the truth effect: Learning the interpretation of processing
fluency in judgments of truth. Journal of Experimental Psychology: Learning, Memory, and Cognition, 33,
219-230.
Wänke, M., Bless, H., & Biller, B. (1996). Subjective experience versus content of information in
the construction of attitude judgments. Personality and Social Psychology Bulletin, 22, 1105-1113.
Wänke, M., Bohner, G., & Jurkowitsch, A. (1997). There are many reasons to drive a BMW Surely you know one: Ease of Argument Generation influences Brand Attitudes. Journal of Consumer
Research, 24, 70-77
Weaver, K., Garcia, S.M., Schwarz, N., & Miller, D. T. (2007). Inferring the popularity of an
opinion from its familiarity: A repetitive voice can sound like a chorus. Journal of Personality and Social
Psychology, 92, 821-833.
Whittlesea, B. W. A. (1993). Illusions of familiarity. Journal of Experimental Psychology: Learning,
Memory, and Cognition, 19, 1235-1253.
Whittlesea, B. W. A., Jacoby, L. L., & Girard, K. (1990). Illusions of immediate memory: Evidence
of an attributional basis for feelings of familiarity and perceptual quality. Journal of Memory and
Language, 29, 716-732.
Winkielman, P. & Cacioppo, J. T. (2001). Mind at ease puts a smile on the face:
Psychophysiological evidence that processing facilitation leads to positive affect. Journal of Personality
and Social Psychology, 81, 989–1000.
Winkielman, P., Schwarz, N., & Belli, R.F. (1998). The role of ease of retrieval and attribution in
memory judgments: Judging your memory as worse despite recalling more events. Psychological
Science, 9, 124-126.

Meaning in context -- 22
Winkielman, P., Schwarz, N., Fazendeiro, T, & Reber, R. (2003). The hedonic marking of
processing fluency: Implications for evaluative judgment. In J. Musch & K.C. Klauer (eds.), The
psychology of evaluation: Affective processes in cognition and emotion (pp. 189-217). Mahwah, NJ:
Erlbaum.
Winkielman, P., Schwarz, N., & Nowak, A. (2002). Affect and processing dynamics. In S. Moore &
M. Oaksford (eds.), Emotional cognition (Advances in Consciousness Research, Vol. 44, pp. 111-138).
Amsterdam, NL: John Benjamins.
Witherspoon, D., & Allan, L.G. (1985). The effects of a prior presentation on temporal
judgments in a perceptual identification task. Memory and Cognition, 13, 103-111.
Zajonc, R.B. (1968). Attitudinal effects of mere exposure. Journal of Personality and Social
Psychology: Monograph Supplement, 9, 1-27.

